You know, I haven't bothered you on that, because that's my job, as you know.
All right.
For whom are you writing?
Well, anyway, so we'll just ask you a few more questions, and I'll be on my way.
When you're doing a biography like this, does the subject, I know it's almost a cliche question, but does he come alive for you?
He comes so much alive that I was haunted in my dreams.
and kept waking up in the night, I was still writing, and Lincoln right there in my dreams, not approving or approving or saying, this isn't the way it was, and arguing with me in my dreams.
It would probably be a nightmare, but not once, but repeatedly, over and over again.
You're so absorbed in this whole business that you can't pull out and say, oh, well, that's just a job I do from nine to five.
You do it all the time.
I have a great, this is a good quote for you,
You said at the beginning you worked it by his side, at his shoulder.
I think what you're telling me now is the point where he was at your shoulder.
Well, I would like to think so.
And it does become flesh and blood for you.
Oh, yes.
And do you go and do you visit any of the sites?
I know just a couple weeks ago I was in Washington and I
walked into Ford's Theater and walked across the street.
Well, you know, in some ways, maybe we're going back to one of the very earliest questions, one of the perhaps precipitating things in deciding to do this, my wife, Aida, and I were down in Washington and we went again to the Lincoln Memorial.
Now, I've been there so many times that I fear that any
Okay, that's the Lincoln Memorial.
She had not been there, not been there in years at any rate, and therefore went much more closely over it than I had.
And she pointed to the second in audio, which is on the right hand side, his left hand side, your right hand side as you come in.
And I never realized
That sentence was there, that this war can go on until every drop of blood drawn by the lash shall be paid for in blood drawn by the sword.
That's a terrible thought.
Can you imagine any president saying, until all the injustice that occurred in whatever war Bosnia has been repaid in blood, this war has to go on forever?
What did he mean by that?
Why did he say things like that?
It was a horrible thing, she said.
Well, I came only thinking about, you know, the words had been rolling in my mind so long that they sort of got smooth, the way pebbles do in those machines, like smooth pebbles.
And I began thinking, those are very harsh words.
And what I... So you agreed with her?
I came to agree with her, and then I got to thinking, okay, what was it that he was trying to say?
Why did he say it this way?
He could have said that he believed in predestination, that God will, that this war is going on, that he will go on to a certain time.
He never used, and I had a computer search, I have all of Lincoln's works on my computer, I searched through, he never used the word predestination.
What was it he was trying to say?
Well, he was invoking an old Protestant doctrine which
All Baptists, all Presbyterians, all Calvinists in general had drummed into the American society over and over again the doctrine of exact retribution.
Namely, an infringement of the Lord's law has to be paid for in exactly the same measure that the offense itself.
A heavy offense against the law has to have a heavy punishment.
This doctrine of exact retribution was something that Lincoln's audience could understand, could empathize with, could vibrate with.
If he had said, which would have been more characteristic of him, say, the doctrine of necessity says the war has to go on, people wouldn't know.
If he had said predestination, that involved theological concepts, he was not prepared to try to make it.
But if you talk about retribution,
Instantly, there's a bell that rings in millions of Americans' minds.
Ah, we know what he's talking about.
We have offended against the law, not merely the South, but we in the North and the South have offended against the Lord in the heavy fashion of having slaves in this country and exploiting them for 250 years, and there has to be any exact payment on the other side of the scale, and that is what we're seeing, and that's why the war goes on so.
Ah, now we understand why the war goes on and what's going to happen at the beginning.
And do you, in your mind, rank him as a president?
Oh, I think he's the greatest of all.
And did you feel this going into the study?
No, I didn't, really.
That is, I had no special thought.
I would have ranked him among the top American presidents.
When I started, perhaps my favorite would have been Thomas Jefferson.
not for his presidential years, but simply because he was such a wonderful man and ranged all over the universe.
But the more I've studied Lincoln, the more I've followed his thought processes, the more I've come to understand how he made decisions and why he made them when he did, the more convinced I am that he understood leadership better than any other American president.
It's kind of odd.
I didn't start this book out as a study in leadership.
It turns out, now that it's finished, that there are programs and courses all over the country studying leadership.
It's the hot thing.
I didn't know this when I started.
I didn't write it for that purpose.
But I do think it is a study in leadership.
And how do you judge his interests?
One can't make one categorical
statement about that.
He was not a wide-ranging intellect in that he had, as far as I can tell, no interest in art, literature.
He loved Shakespeare.
He loved Shakespeare, but in fiction, he started one novel once and put it down.
He had a paragraph.
He was not widely traveled.
He had limited range of acquaintances.
He was not
He just knows a polished social person of social graces, though he could be a practically charming host.
I do not think that he had a theoretical mind that he was interested in abstract ideas ever, particularly.
But having made all those disclaimers, one is left with a particular kind of mind that deals with reality as it is.
that deals with it on a point-by-point basis, an ad hoc basis, and has a degree of flexibility that allows you to shift with circumstances and to say, okay, if plan A doesn't work, there's plan B, but if plan B doesn't work, there's plan C. This kind of flexibility, I think, gave Lincoln many of his most enduring and endearing qualities.
One starts off, perhaps,
in Lincoln scholarship, but a certain kind of frustration with Lincoln.
Why in heaven's name did he put up with the incompetent generals?
Well, let George Lee McClellan hang around all those years to eat after the feed and get him in nowhere.
Well, it's partly because of a degree of tolerance that Lincoln encouraged with this flexibility, a feeling of, okay, McClellan's first plan didn't work, let's try plan B, let's try plan C, just plan D.
Let's let him give a chance.
He was tolerant of subordinates, he was tolerant of failure, perhaps because he had a lot of failure in his own life.
He almost never made rash or precipitous decisions, so he'd get very angry, but he didn't make rash decisions on the basis of his anger.
These are to be the qualities of a great man and a very great leader.
It seems to be yours.
Now you said that you had one more big look at you.
You don't know how to do that?
I don't know, I hope.
No.
Look at all the resources you have here.
You have to.
I don't know what I would do.
Look, I can see Barry Chestnut Civil War.
Sure you can.
That whole upper tier is biography.
I don't know.
It's hard for me to think that it'll ever come a day that I don't write.
It'll be sort of like not reading.
So what will I do?
One possibility is that
In a few years, perhaps I will have some more essays.
Lincoln Reconsidered has done very well over the years, and people might be interested in another book like that.
But in the other hand, maybe it's time to do something different.
Maybe I will write a mystery story.
I love mystery stories.
Would you like to write a mystery story?
I'd love to write a mystery story.
Do you have an idea for a plot?
I would love to write a mystery story in historical times.
You want to capitalize on what I have some ideas.
Do you have an idea for a hero or character?
I'm not born upon now.
Or I might write a memoir.
I'd like to see a mystery story, too, though.
Don't give up on that.
I don't know what I... One final question, because I know you have some help coming in.
But you are, by temperament, a historian or a biographer?
I mean, your great prizes and awards is for biography.
It's just interesting, isn't it?
Well, this is a problem of self-identification.
And as I said, you know, really up until the Thomas Wolfe was published, I'd always thought I'm a historian who just happened every now and then to write about particular individuals.
And then when people, quite a lot of people, began
to like the Thomas Moore book, and they say, this is the way we want to do biography, this is the way we type biography.
I began thinking, you know, maybe I'm not much of a historian anyway, maybe I really have all along been a kind of biographer monquet, working in the historian's field.
Maybe there's not that much difference.
And which mystery writers do you read?
I read all.
I love all these historians.
I feel them.
I read them every night.
It puts my mind in neutral.
I love the classical ones.
I can read over and over again.
I can watch or read Sherlock Holmes over and over again.
I don't really like, perhaps, some of the more recent hard-boiled mysteries that seem to be primarily violence for violence.
I like mystery stories that have a plot and detection that a lot of... E.G.
James must be a... Yes, that's exactly right.
And my reason for sort of thinking on that, it doesn't mean that I do like mystery stories.
Everybody does, almost.
But in some ways, the historian's task is like that of the detective.
That is, you work yourself around him.
What is it that could have done this?
Why did he do this at this time?
Who's responsible for doing that?
And this really is a detective question.
I think you've given me my lead, and I'm going to... See, this one's for me.
I already put the plastic on it to save it.
Now, how should...